---
title: "Bash: $PATH"
---

> We want to create a script (called **zhead**) that can be executed from any directory. 
> To do this, we need to create a text file that will be the script.
> Second, we will add the script to a directory that is in the `$PATH` environment variable.

To make an example we will write a script that will display the first 10 lines of a gzipped file and call it `zhead`.

When we execute any command, we are just using a program, and a program is a file. For example, `ls`, is usually stored in `/usr/bin/ls`. So why we can use it in any directory?

When we type a command name, the shell looks for it in the directories listed in the `PATH` environment variable. 
The `$PATH` environment variable is a colon-separated list of directories that your shell searches when you type a command. 
If the command is found in one of the directories, the shell executes it. If the command is not found, the shell displays an error message.

To see the content of your `PATH` environment variable:

{% highlight bash %}
echo $PATH
{% endhighlight %}

You will see a list of directories separated by colons. These are the directories that the shell will search when looking for a command to execute. 

:bulb: to see the same as a list, we can use *sed* to replace the colons with newlines:

{% highlight bash %}
echo $PATH | sed 's/:/\n/g'
{% endhighlight %}

## 1. Create the script

First, let's create the script in your home directory:

```bash
nano ~/zhead
```

In the nano editor, enter the following content:

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash

if [ $# -eq 0 ]; then
    echo "Error: No file supplied"
    echo "Usage: zhead <gzipped-file>"
    exit 1
fi

gzip -d "$1" | head
{% endhighlight %}

* :warning: the first line is the **shebang line**. It tells the system which interpreter to use to run the script. In this case, it specifies that the script should be run using the Bash shell. It must be the first line of the script, must start with `#!`, and must be followed by the path to the interpreter. No spaces are allowed between the `#!` and the interpreter path.
* the `if` statement checks if the number of arguments passed to the script is equal to 0. If it is, the script prints an error message and exits.
* the `gzip` command decompresses the gzipped file passed as an argument and pipes the output to the `head` command, which displays the first 10 lines of the file.

Press `Ctrl+X`, then `Y`, and `Enter` to save and exit.

## 2. Create the ~/bin directory

If it doesn't already exist, create the `~/bin` directory:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/bin
```

## 3. Move the script to ~/bin

Move the script to the `~/bin` directory:

```bash
mv ~/zhead ~/bin/
```

If we try to execute the program now, we will get a permission denied error:

```bash
~/bin/zhead
```

This is because the file doesn't have the executable permission set:

```bash
ls -l ~/bin/zhead
```

You should see output similar to this:

```bash
-rw-r--r-- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 123 Oct 19 10:00 /home/ubuntu/bin/zhead
```

The first characters show the [permissions of the file(https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/linux-file-permissions-explained).
*r* means the file is readable, *w* means the file is writable, and *x* means the file is executable. The first character is a *d* if the file is a directory. There are no *x* characters in the permissions, so the file is not executable.

## 4. Make the script executable

Change the permissions to make the script executable (*+x* to add executable) 
for the file owner (*u*, for user):

```bash
chmod u+x ~/bin/zhead
```

Let's verify the change:

```bash
ls -l ~/bin/zhead
```

You should see output similar to this:

```bash
-rwxr-xr-x 1 ubuntu ubuntu 123 Oct 19 10:00 /home/ubuntu/bin/zhead
```

The `x` in the permissions indicates that the file is now executable.

## 5. Add ~/bin to PATH

First, let's check if `~/bin` is already in your `PATH`:

```bash
echo $PATH
```

If you don't see `/home/ubuntu/bin` or `~/bin` in the output, we need to add it.

Edit your `.bashrc` file:

```bash
nano ~/.bashrc
```

Add the following line at the end of the file:

```bash
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"
```

Press `Ctrl+X`, then `Y`, and `Enter` to save and exit.

## 6. Refresh shell settings

To apply the changes without logging out and back in, run:

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

## 7. Verify the changes

Check your `PATH` again:

```bash
echo $PATH
```

You should now see `/home/ubuntu/bin` or `~/bin` at the beginning of your `PATH`.

## 8. Test the script

Try running the script:

```bash
zhead
```

You should see the usage message:

```bash
Error: No file supplied
Usage: zhead <gzipped-file>
```

Now, try it with a gzipped file:

```bash
zhead /path/to/your/gzipped/file.gz
```

This should display the first 10 lines of the uncompressed file.

We did it!